Quantal Analysis as Bayesian Inference. 

ABSTRACT

Quantal analysis of synaptic recordings can be used to determine the
locus of changing synaptic strength due to synaptic plasticity. The
state-fo-the art method for determining quantal parameters,
mean-variance analysis, was developed in brain slice proparations
where signal-to-noise ratios were large and it is possible to change
extracellular calcium on a rapid timescale. In many preparations,
including a locust visuo-motor interneuron, these conditions do not
hold. Here, we present an improved method for quantal analysis based
on a probablistic model for the raw synaptic recordings. We show that
a model of the membrane potential noise must consider both process and
observation noise, and that EPSP amplitudes measured as parameter
estimates in such a model are more accurately observed than using
standard methods or using models that lack either of these two noise
components. We show quantal parameters can in principle be
directly estimated from these amplitudes with Bayesian inference using
Markov-chain monte carlo. We then measure quantal parameters from recordings..

## Introduction

Quantal analysis is the central measuremernt problem of synaptic
physiology. By using fluctuations in measred EPSP strengths
.. elucidate what: locus of chaneg. structure of
synapse. multiquyantal release.

[In multi-probability fluctuation
analysis, we make recordings in several different release probability
conditions (usually evoked by changing the extracellular calcium and
magnesium concentrations), in which case there may be sufficient
information in the EPSP fluctuations to estimate N, p and q. In
classical MPFA, a fitting procedure is used based on the mean and the
variance of EPSPs recorded in different but stable conditions. In a
variant, Humeau et al (1198) use recordings made during slow changes
of release probabilit. We have shown that these methods are
insufficient for our recordings.]

How: state of the art. Requirements. 

slow change. Humeau idea. 

most natural way of estimating things is ML or bayes. 

Locust phase change. motivate investigation.

here: fail!

## Methods

## Electrophysiological recordings

blah blah

## Probabilistic model and inference

Or model of synaptic potential waveforms is based on the binomial
model for synaptic release (Katz; Silver?). We assume that a synaptic
connection consists of N functional release sites, which upon arrival
of the action potential each release a packet of neurotransmitter with
a probability p, which depends on the extracellular calcium
concentration.  Each released packet induces in the postsynaptic cell
a conductance waveform q(t) scaled by a random number sampled from the
distribution N(1,CVi^2). This unitary waveform is assumed to be
independent of the extracellular calcium concentration. For n
successive trials with a fixed release probability p, the EPSP
amplitudes without observation noise are thus distributed as:

for 1..n 
  nr ~ B(p,n)
  A ~ N(nr*q, ...)

where B is the binomial distribution. The conductance amplitude A is
only indirectly observed through the postsynaptic potential
waveform. To give a realistic model for this potential waveform, we
consider the cell as an RC circuit injected with a synaptic
conductance waveform scaled to amplitude A and further white noise
current source, given by the stochastic differential equation

dV = rc...

this model as been used to model neural intracellular recording
several times before. In figure 2 and 3, we show that this model is
insufficient and that there is also independent observation noise on
every time point. Thus the final model is: 

for i <- 1..n 
  nr_i ~ B(p_i,n)
  A_i ~ N(nr*q, ...)
  dV_i = RC*(A*gsyn..)*dt + dW(t)
  Vobs = N(V_i, sigma_obs^2*I)

where V is converted from a timeseries to a vector of time-sampled
observations.

There are a number of problems associated with using Bayesian
inference directly on this model to infer likely values for N, p and
q. First, it contains an extremely large number of parameters (at
least one parameter (V_i) per timepoint!) and would require all the recorded
data to remain in memory at once. A more fundamental problem is this:
on trials where exactly zero sites release neurotransmitter packets,
the parameter A_i is distributed as N(0,0) and so cannot be assigned
a probability distribution. Furthermore, we have yet to specify the
form or the parameters of the synaptic conductance waveform gsyn(t) or
how the release probablities p_i are distributed. We solve all of
these problems by rewriting the model and making a series of pragmatic
approximations.

First, we rewrite the SDE governing V to a gaussian process. The SDE
is a Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process which has covariance function 

cov (t1,t2) = ...

Thus, if we are interested in the values of this process at times
corresponding to the time points at which the membrane potential
was recorded, these values can be written as vector sampled from a
multivariate normal distribution. 

[v(t1), v(t2)....] ~ N(mu, BigSigma)

where BigSimga is filled in by evaluating the covariance function at
the appropriate pair of time points.

The advantage of the gaussian process is that it can be combined with
the observation noise, such that the probability distribution for Vobs
can be given directly:

[vobs(t1), vobs(t2)....] ~ N(mu, BigSigma+sigma_obs^2*I)

This transformation eliminates the vast number of parameters (V_i) in
out model.

Second, we use the overall mean potential waveform calculated from the
real data as the amplitude-scaled mean waveform for the gaussian
process in the model. This is clearly an approximation, in that in a
fully probabilistic approach there would be some uncertainty about the
shape of this waveform. Nevertheless, for the large number of
recordings we have made here this uncertainty is likely to be small;
our approach is broadly consistent with Empirical Bayes methods. 

There still remains the limitation that the prior for the amplitude
parameter A cannot be assigned a density function in the case of
failures. We solve this by splitting the quantal analysis up into
three separate estimation problems. First, we estimate the parameters
of the covariance matrix that describes the noise process from
membrane potential recordings . Second, amplitudes Ai from the raw
data based on the gaussian process, with a impropoer uniform prior on
A (essentially Maximum likelihood estimation). This gives a mean and
an error for A (as we show in apendix A, the posterior is gaussian and
the error is independent of A and determined entirely by the
covariance matrix and the mean waveform). Third, we use the estimated
mean as the observed A and add the estimated variance of A to the
normal distribution by which it is distributed. We now describe these
three steps in detail:

1. Noise process estimation 

We give a model for noisy membrane potential recordings in the absense
of evoked synaptic input:

[vobs(t1), vobs(t2)....] ~ N(vmean, BigSigma+sigma_obs^2*I)

where bigSigma_t1,t2 = exp ...

The model parameters are thus theta, sigma, sigmaObs and vmean, which
is assumued to be a scalar value. 

We estimated these parameters for each cell by maximising the
likelihood based on 10 X ms segments recorded prior to an evoked
EPSP. 

2. EPSP amplitude estimation

The model for EPSP waveforms is nearly identical to that of the noise
process:

[vobs(t1), vobs(t2)....] ~ N(A*vm(t)+v0, BigSigma+sigma_obs^2*I)

but here the entire covariance matrix is regarded as a fixed quantity,
using the maximum likelihood parameters from the noise estimation. The
only remaining parameters are A and v0 (a nuisance parameters). We
optimised the likelihood of each recorded EPSP independently using the
Nelder-Mead simplex method, and recorded for each waveform the maximum
likelihood estimate Ahat and the variance sigma_A calculated from the
inverse of a finite-difference approximation to the Hessian of the
likelihood function at the peak. 

3. Quantal parameter estimation

We used the inidividual EPSP estimates Ahat and their uncertainty
sigma_A as the data from which quantal parameters were estimated. The
model for these amplitudes is given by

for i <- 1..n 
  nr_i ~ B(p_i,N)
  A_i ~ N(nr*q, ... + sigma_A^2)

which has a single latent parameter per EPSP. We can collapse this
parameter by summing over it. This leave no repeated latent variable
at all:

p(Ai,sigma_a) = sum nr <- 0..n $ ...

We used the adaptive metropolis sampler (Haario) to sample N, q, p. 

## Results

In order to determine the locus of phenotypic synaptic plasticity, we
performed intracellular recordings from gregarious and solitarious
fast extensor tibiae motor neurons (FETi). The recordings were
performed at the same time as extracellular recording of activity in
the Descending Contralateral Movement Detector evoked by the movement
of a small rotating disc. In addition, during these recordings we
changed the calcium concentration in order to change the synaptic release
probability.

Individual EPSPs timelocked to DCMD spikes and the average EPSP
waveform across the entire recording duration are shown in Figure
1A. We initially quantified the EPSP amplitude on individual trials
using by subtracting the mean voltage during a 6 ms window centred on
the peak of the average EPSP waveform from a 6 ms window centred 4 ms
prior to the presynaptic spike. This measurement methodology
implements the recommendations in Silver 2003. The timecourse of
EPSP amplitudes measured in such a way is shown in Figure 1B. We then
constructed the non-stationary mean-variance curve as described in
Humeau et al. 2002. Unlike in that study, the points on our
mean-variance plot did not obviously take the form of a parabola. It
is likely that the extra noise in our recorded EPSPs obscured the
theoretically predicted shape of the mean-variance curve.

Probabilistic methods are known to be able to extract information
where ad-hoc estimators cannot (MacKay book). We therefore turned to
building a probabilistic model for all the available data, including
the noise process, the EPSP shape and the quantal release process, in
an attempt to improve the estimation of the synaptic release
parameters.

* lots of data - break model down: noise model, epsp amplitude
  model, quantal model. Later show why this is not only convenient but
  also necessary in this case.

Based on previous work (Ditlevson), we first considered an
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model for the membrane noise. Such a model
describes an RC circuit in parallel with a white noise current source,
and is governed by the stochastic differential equation 

\begin{math}

C dV = ...

\end{math}

where the first term on the right-hand side corresponds to the
standard membrane equation and the second term is the infinitesimal
increment of the wiener process, or informally

In order to estimate parameters theta and sigma, we used the
equivalent gaussian process with covariance function

\begin{math}

\end{math}

This gave us a direct expression for the likelihood of observing a
vector v corresponding to the membrane voltage sampled with a fixed
interval. 

use which data?

Using Bayesian inference based on markov chain monte carlo, we were
able to estimate parameters theta and sigma from recordings from
locust neurons. We then assessed the quality of this model by
simulating random voltage traces using parameters drawn from these
estimates (the posterior). We compared these traces to the
experimentally observed voltage traces. 

* doesn't work 

* add independent observation noise - brings sigma down. Can do this
  without latent variables

* differences greg and sol

* posterior predictive

* more accurate measurement of EPSP based on the noise process?

* how to model EPSP waveform: cheat

* gaussian process model

* compare two measurements

* quantify variance (lowess-corrected) across cells

FIGURE LEGENDS

1. Locust DCMD-FETi EPSPs recorded during varying extracellular
calcium concentrations do not show a parabolic mean-variance
relationship. A, EPSPs recorded from FETi neurons aligned to action
potentials recorded from DMCD nerve recordings, with individual
recordings (red) superimposed by an average potential (black). B, EPSP
amplitudes measures during varying extracellular
Ca2+. C and D, Mean-variance curve for calculated with chunk sizes of
100 EPSPs (C) and 500 EPSPs (D).

To do: check Mean-var has been calculated with detrended means.
-a: add APs?
-b: low Ca bars?

2. Probabilistic models of intracellular recordings need to take into
account both mean-reverting process noise and observation noise. A,
Recorded baseline membrane potential traces. B, Membrane potential
traces from a model that has only observation noise, simulated using
parameters estimated for that model from the recorded data. C, As B,
but using a model that has only mean-reverting (Ornstein-Uhlenbeck)
process noise. D, As B, with a model that has both mean-reverting
process and observation noise. E, parameter estimates for models with
only process (Ei) and both process and observation (Eii and Eiii) for
different cells. Ei and Eii show parameter estimates for comparable
parameters (theta vs sigma) in models with and without observation
noise. Fi, Posterior predictive check based on the span (subtraction
of low point from high point potential values during 100ms) for models
with observation, process and both observation and process noise. Fii,
Posterior predictive check using the membrane potential
autocorrelation simulated with estimated parameters (red) and observed
autocorrelation (black). 

to do: colour according to sol/greg. Axis labels. Ticks. Labels

3. Individual EPSP amplitude are most accurately measured through a
probabilistic model that incorporates process and observation
noise. A, Time-course of EPSP amplitudes measured by subtracting the
average during a baseline period from the average potential during a
3ms window placed at the peak of the EPSP waveform. B-D, EPSP
amplitudes measured with (maximum likelihood) statistical parameter
estimation in models with different noise components. B, using a model
with only observation noise. C, Using only mean-reverting process
noise. D, using both process and observation noise. E, Variance of
EPSP amplitudes, detrended to remove variance due to slow changes in
EPSP amlitude caused by changes in extracellular calcium, using
different the measurement methodologies in A-D. 

4. The amplitude of an EPSP, based on a quantal release model, cannot
be assigned a finite probability density unless measurement error is
incorporated in the model. A, Red, histogram of quantal
events simulated with N=10, Q=0.1, P = ?. The long bar located at Q=0
inidicates failures of all release sites. B, Histogram of quantal
events simulated as above, but with an additional measurement error of
EPSP amplitudes (red) Green, probability density function from Eq (X).  

5. A Bayesian model of quantal synaptic transmission can reliably
estimate quantal parameters from synthetic data simulated with N=50
and P_{max}= 0.8. A, simulated membrane potentials (i) and EPSP
amplitudes measured as in 4D (ii). B, posterior samples (parameter
estimates) from a Markov-chain monte carlo run. (i) N against P, (ii)
(Q against N) and (iii) P against Q. C, Mean-variance curve from the
same data set. D, To validate the inference, the data simulation -
parameter estimation procedure was repeated 40 times. Posterior
histograms for N (i) and the cumulative distribution of quantiles of
the parameter value used to generate the data (50) within the
parameter estimates.

6. Estimates of the DCMD-FETi quantal synaptic parameters. A,
Estimates of the number of release sites (N) in solitarious (top) and
gregarious (bottom) animals. B, Estimates of the release probability
under baseline (4 mM Ca2+) conditions in solitarious and gregarious
animals. C, Estimates of the quantal size (Q) in solitarious (top) and
gregarious (bottom) animals.

